two years ago I set off from central
London on the tube and ended up
somewhere in the east of the city
walking into a self storage unit to meet
a guy that had 2,000 luxury polo shirts
for sale and as I made my way down the
corridor a broken blinking light made it
just like the cliche scene from a
gangster movie our man was early and he
was waiting for me in front of a unit
secured two for padlocks down the side
under opening exchange it was like a
verbal sparring match where he threw the
first punch is who was I did I have a
business card and where was I going to
sell and then he just started opening up
and it was my turn where were the polo
shirts coming from what paperwork did he
have and when was his next shipment
going to arrive I was treading the fine
line between asking enough questions to
get what I needed and not enough for him
to become suspicious because what he
didn't know is that I'm a counterfeit
investigator and after 20 minutes or so
of checking over the product for the
tell-tale signs of counterfeit
production say body stitch labels of how
the packaging had a huge brand logo
stamped all over the front of it I was
finally on my way out but not before he
insisted on walking down to the street
with me and back to the station
and the feeling after these meetings is
always the same my heart is beating like
a drum because you never know if they've
actually bought your story
or they're gonna start following you to
see who you really are
relief only comes when you turn the
first corner and glance behind and
they're not standing there but what I
counter fit polo shirts early didn't
realize is that everything I've seen and
heard would result in a dawn raid on his
house him being woken out of bed by
eight men on his doorstep and all his
products seized but this would reveal
that he was just a pawn at the end of
accounts 40 network spanning three
continents and he was just the first
loose thread that I'd started to pull on
in the hope that it would all unravel
why go through all that trouble well
maybe counterfeiting is a victimless
crime
these big companies they make enough
money so if anything counterfeiting is
just like a free form of advertising
right and consumers believe just that
that the buying and selling of faith's
is not that big a deal but I'm here to
tell you that that is just not true
what the tourists on holiday doesn't see
about those fake handbags is they may
they may well have been stitched
together by a child that was trafficked
away from her family and what the car
repair shop owner doesn't realize about
those fake brake pads is they may well
be lining the pockets of an organized
crime gang involved in drugs and
prostitution and while those two things
are horrible to think about it gets much
worse because counterfeiting is even
funding terrorism let that sink in for a
moment
terrorists are selling fakes to fund
attacks attacks in our cities that tried
to make victims of all of us you
wouldn't buy a live scorpion because
there's a chance that it was Stinger on
the way home but would you still buy a
fake handbag if he knew the profits
would enable someone to buy bullets that
would kill you and other innocent people
six months later maybe not okay time to
come clean in my youth yeah I might look
like I'm still cleaning on through a bit
i bought fake watches while on holiday
in the Canary Islands but why do I tell
you this well we've all done it all we
know someone that's done it and until
this very moment maybe you didn't think
twice about it and nor did I until I
answered a 20-word cryptic advert to
become an intellectual property
investigator it said full training given
and some international travel within a
week I was creating my first and many
aliases and in the ten years since I've
investigated fake car parts alloy wheels
fake pet grooming tools fake bicycle
parts and of course the counterfeiters
favorite fake luxury leather goods
clothing and shoes and what I've learned
in the 10 years of investigating fakes
is that once you start to scratched
surface you find that they're rotten to
the core as are the people and
organizations than are making money from
them because they're profiting on a
massive massive scale you can only make
around 100 to 200 percent selling drugs
on the street you can make two thousand
percent selling fakes online with little
of the same risks or penalties and this
quick easy money then goes on to funds
the more serious types of crime and it
pays the way to making these
organizations these criminal
organizations look more legitimate so
let me bring you in on a live case
earlier this year a series of raids took
place in one of my longest-running
investigations five warehouses were
raided in Turkey and over two million
finished counterfeit clothing products
were seized and it took 16 trucks to
take that all away but this gang have
been clever they've gone to the lengths
of creating their own fashion brands
complete with registered trademarks and
even having photo shoots on yachts in
Italy and they would use these
completely unheard of and unsuspicious
brand names as a way of shipping
container loads of fakes it's a shell
companies that they're set up across
Europe and documents found during those
raids found that they've been falsifying
shipping documents so the customs
officials would literally have no idea
who would send the products in the first
place when police got access to just one
bank account they found nearly three
million euros had been laundered out of
Spain in less than two years and just
two days after those raids that gang
were trying to bribe a law firm to get
their stock back even now we have no
idea where all that money went to who it
went to but you can bet it's never going
to benefit the likes of you or me but
these aren't just low-level street thugs
they're business professionals and they
fly first-class they trick legitimate
businesses with convincing fake invoices
and paperwork so everything just seems
real and then they set up eBay and
Amazon accounts just to compete with the
people they've already sold fakes to but
this isn't just happening online for a
few years I also used to attend
automotive trade shows taking place in
huge exhibition spaces but away from the
Ferraris and the Bentley's and the
flashing lights that be companies
selling fakes companies with a brochure
on the counter and another one
underneath if you ask them the right
questions and they would sell me fake
car parts faulty fake car parts that
have been estimated to cause over 36,000
fatalities deaths on our roads each year
counterfeiting set to become a two point
three trillion dollar underground
economy and the damage that can be done
with that kind of money it's really
frightening because fakes fund terror
fake trainers on the streets of Paris
fake cigarettes in West Africa and
pirate music CDs in the USA have all
gone on to fund trips to training camps
but weapons and ammunition or the
ingredients for explosives in June 2014
the French security services stopped
monitoring the communications of Syed
and cherif kouachi the three brothers
had been on a watch list a terror watch
list for three years but that summer
they're only picking up that Sharif was
buying fake trainers from China so it
signaled a shift away from extremism
into what was considered a low-level
petty crime the threat had gone away
seven months later the two brothers
walked into the offices of Charlie Hebdo
magazine and killed 12 people wounded 11
more with guns bought from the proceeds
of those fakes so whatever you think
this isn't a far away problem happening
in China it's happening right here in
Paris is not unique ten years earlier in
2004 a hundred ninety-one people lost
their lives when a Madrid commuter train
was bombed the attack had been partly
funded by the sale of pirate music CDs
in the US two years prior to that an al
Qaeda training manual recommended
explicitly selling fakes is a good way
of supporting terror cells but despite
this despite the evidence connecting
terrorism counterfeiting we do go on
buying them increasing the demand to the
point where there's even a store
in Turkey called I love genuine fakes
and you have tourists posing with
photographs on TripAdvisor giving it
five star reviews
but with those st. tourists have gone
into a store called I love genuine fake
viagra pills or I genuinely love funding
terrorism I doubt it
many of us think that we're completely
helpless against organised crime and
terrorism that we can do nothing about
the next attack but I believe you can
you can by becoming investigators - the
way we crippled these networks is to cut
their funding and that means cutting the
demand and changing this idea that it's
a victimless crime let's all will
identify counterfeiters and don't give
them our money so here's a few tips from
one investigators or another to get you
started number one here's a typical
online counsellors website note the URL
if you're shopping for sunglasses or
camera lenses say and you come across a
website like medical insurance
bankruptcy calm starts to get very
suspicious but counterfeiters register
expired domain names as a way of keeping
up the old websites Google page ranking
number two is the website screaming at
you that everything is 100% genuine but
still giving you 75 percent of the
latest collection look for words like
master copy overruns straight from the
factory they could write this all in
comic sans it's that much of a joke
number three if you get as far as the
checkout page and you don't see HTTPS or
a padlock symbol next to the URL you
should really start thinking about
closing the tab because these indicate
active security measures that will keep
your personal and credit card
information safe okay last one go
hunting for the contact us page if you
can only find a generic web form no
company name telephone number email
address postal address that's it case
closed
you found a counterfeiter sadly you're
going to have to go back to Google
wouldn't start your shopping search all
over again
but you didn't get ripped off so it's
only a good thing
as the world's most famous fictional
detective would say Watson the game is
afoot only this time my investigator
friends the game is painfully real so
the next time you're shopping online or
perhaps wherever it is look closer
question that little bit deeper and ask
yourself before you hand over the cash
or click buy am I sure this is real tell
your friend that used to buy counterfeit
watches that he may just have brought
the next attack one day closer and if
you see an Instagram advert for fakes
don't keep scrolling past report it to
the platform as a scan let's shine a
light on the dark forces of
counterfeiting that are hiding in plain
sight so please spread the word and
don't stop investigating thank you
[Applause]